README.md, before:

# Crab: A Language-Agnostic Engine for Static Analysis #

<img src="http://i.imgur.com/IDKhq5h.png" alt="crab logo" width=280 height=200 />

# Description #

Crab allows to perform static analysis of programs based on
[Abstract Interpretation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_interpretation).

Crab does not analyze directly a mainstream programming language such as
C, C++, or Java but instead it analyzes a simplified
Control-Flow-Graph (CFG) based language which is
language-independent. This can allow Crab analyzing different
programming languages assuming a translator to the CFG-based language
is available.

Crab has been designed to have two kind of users:

1.  Analysis/verification tools that want to compute invariants using
    abstract interpretation.

2.  Researchers on abstract interpretation who would like to
    experiment with new abstract domains and fixpoint iterators.

In spite of its simple design, Crab can scale with large real programs
and its CFG-based language is rich enough to represent programs with
loops, functions, pointers, etc.

The foundations of Crab is based on a collection of abstract domains
and fixpoint iterators built on the top of
[Ikos](http://ti.arc.nasa.gov/opensource/ikos/) (Inference Kernel for
Open Static Analyzers) developed by NASA Ames Research Center.

# Crab architecture #

![Crab Architecture](https://github.com/caballa/crab/blob/crab_language/Crab_arch.jpg?raw=true "Crab Architecture")

# Installation and Usage #

Crab is written in C++ and uses heavily the Boost library. The main
requirements are:

- C++ compiler supporting c++11
- Boost and GMP

To include Crab in your application you just need to include the
corresponding C++ header files located at the `include` directory and
make sure that you link your application with the Crab libraries
(`lib` directory). This repository contains a `CMakeLists.txt` that
you can adapt for your own needs.

The `tests` directory contains many examples of how to build CFGs and
compute invariants using different abstract domains. To install all
the tests via `CMake` type:

	mkdir build && cd build
    cmake -DENABLE_TESTS=ON -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=run ../
    cmake --build . --target install 

and, for instance, to execute the test `tests/simple/test1.cc` type:

    cd run/tests/domains && ./test1

The Boxes and Apron domains require third-party libraries. To avoid
the burden to users who are not interested in those domains, the
installation of the libraries is optional.

If you want to use the BOXES domain then add `-DUSE_LDD=ON` option.

If you want to use the Apron library domains then add `-DUSE_APRON=ON` option.

# Example using C++ API#

Assume we want to perform static analysis on the following C-like
program:

```c
    int i,x,y;
	i=0;
	x=1;
	y=0;
	while (i < 100) {
		x=x+y;
		y=y+1;
		i=i+1;
	}	 
``` 

This is the C++ code to build the corresponding Crab CFG and run the
analysis using the Zones domain:

```c++
    // CFG-based language
    #include <crab/cfg/cfg.hpp>
    // Variable factory	
    #include <crab/cfg/var_factory.hpp>
    // Forward analyzer	
    #include <crab/analysis/fwd_analyzer.hpp>

    // linear expressions and constraints
    #include <crab/domains/linear_constraints.hpp>
    // Zones domain
    #include <crab/domains/split_dbm.hpp>

    typedef SplitDBM<z_number, varname_t> zones_domain_t;
    typedef num_fwd_analyzer<cfg_ref_t,zones_domain_t,str_variable_factory>::type analyzer_t;

    int main (int argc, char**argv) {
       // Declare variables i,x, and y
       str_variable_factory vfac;	
       z_var i (vfac ["i"]);
       z_var x (vfac ["x"]);
       z_var y (vfac ["y"]);
       // Create an empty CFG marking "entry" and "exit" are the labels
       // for the entry and exit blocks.
       cfg_t cfg ("entry","ret");
       // Add blocks
       basic_block_t& entry = cfg.insert ("entry");
       basic_block_t& bb1   = cfg.insert ("bb1");
       basic_block_t& bb1_t = cfg.insert ("bb1_t");
       basic_block_t& bb1_f = cfg.insert ("bb1_f");
       basic_block_t& bb2   = cfg.insert ("bb2");
       basic_block_t& ret   = cfg.insert ("ret");
       // Add control flow 
       entry >> bb1; bb1 >> bb1_t; bb1 >> bb1_f;
       bb1_t >> bb2; bb2 >> bb1; bb1_f >> ret;
       // Add statements
       entry.assign(i, 0);
       entry.assign(x, 1);
       entry.assign(y, 0);
       bb1_t.assume(i <= 99);
       bb1_f.assume(i >= 100);
       bb2.add(x,x,y);
       bb2.add(y,y,1);
       bb2.add(i,i,1);

       // Build an analyzer and run the zones domain
       analyzer_t a(cfg,vfac,...);
       a.Run(zones_domain_t::top());
       cout << "Invariants using " << zones_domain_t::getDomainName() << "\n";
	
       // Scan all CFG basic blocks and print the invariants that hold
       // at their entries
       for (auto &b : cfg) {
         auto inv = a[b.label()];
         cout << get_label_str(b.label()) << "=" << inv << "\n";
       }
	   return 0;
    }
```

The Crab output of this program, showing the invariants that hold at
the entry of each basic block, should be something like this:

    Invariants using SplitDBM
	
	entry={}
	bb1={i -> [0, 100], x -> [1, +oo], y -> [0, 100], y-i<=0, y-x<=0, i-x<=0, i-y<=0}
    bb1_t={i -> [0, 100], x -> [1, +oo], y -> [0, 100], y-i<=0, y-x<=0, i-x<=0, i-y<=0}
    bb1_f={i -> [0, 100], x -> [1, +oo], y -> [0, 100], y-i<=0, y-x<=0, i-x<=0, i-y<=0}
    bb2={i -> [0, 99], x -> [1, +oo], y -> [0, 99], y-i<=0, y-x<=0, i-x<=0, i-y<=0}
	ret={i -> [100, 100], x -> [100, +oo], y -> [100, 100], y-i<=0, y-x<=0, i-x<=0, i-y<=0}

# Example reading the CFG from a file#

Crab can also communicate with other tools via files. This is useful
with the client tool is written in a language different from C++ and
thus, the C++ API cannot be used directly.

The client tool only needs to write the CFG into a file following the
grammar described below. Currently, this grammar is a subset of the
language supported by the C++ API.

1. Add option `-DENABLE_CFG_FROM_FILE=ON` to cmake. That is, when cmake
   installs crab type:

        mkdir build && cd build
        cmake -DENABLE_CFG_FROM_FILE=ON -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=run ../
        cmake --build . --target install 

2. Add manually  into `PYTHONPATH` the path to `tools/crabParser.py` (temporary hack).

Steps 1 and 2 should be performned only once. Then, type `crab
filename` where `filename` looks like:

    abs_domain : zones;
    decl : [x:int; y:int;];
    blocks {
      bb1[x:=0; y:=0;]
      bb2[]
      bb3[assume((1*x)<10); x := x + 1; y := y + 1;]
      bb4[assume((1*x)>=10);]
    }
    edges {bb1 ->bb2; bb2 -> bb3; bb3-> bb2; bb2->bb4;}

This is the supported grammar (start symbol `P`). Note only linear
integer expressions without functions. Expressions like `EDGE*`
represents zero or more repetitions of `EDGE`:

    P := DOMAIN_DECL VARS_DECLS BLOCKS EDGES
	
	DOMAIN_DECL := 'abs_domain' ':' DOMAINS ';'
	DOMAINS := 'intervals | 'zones' | 'octagons' | 'polyhedra'

    VARS_DECLS := 'decl' ':' '[' VAR_DECL*  '];'
	VAR_DECL := ID ':' TYPE ';'
	TYPE = int
	
	BLOCKS := 'blocks' '{' BLOCK* '}'
	BLOCK :=  ID '[' STATEMENT* ']'
	STATEMENT := ARITH | ASSIGN | ASSERT | ASSUME | HAVOC
	A_OP := '+' | '-' | '*' | '/'
	ARITH := ID ':=' ID  A_OP ID ';' | ID ':=' ID  A_OP NUM ';' 
	ASSIGN := ID ':=' ID ';' | ID ':=' NUM ';'
	HAVOC := 'havoc' '(' ID ')' ';'
	ASSERT := 'assert' '(' LIN_CONSTRAINT ')' ';'
	ASSUME := 'assume' '(' LIN_CONSTRAINT ')' ';'
	B_OP := '>' | '<' | '=' | '!=' | '>=' | '<='
    LIN_CONSTRAINT := LIN_EXPRESION B_OP NUM
	LIN_EXPRESSION := '(' NUM '*' ID ')' | NUM | LIN_EXPRESSION '+' LIN_EXPRESSION	

	EDGES := 'edges' '{' EDGE* '}'
	EDGE := ID '->' ID ';'	

# Integrating Crab in other verification tools #

Check these projects:

- [Crab-Llvm](https://github.com/seahorn/crab-llvm) is a static
analyzer that infers invariants from LLVM-based languages using Crab.

- [SeaHorn](https://github.com/seahorn) is a verification framework
that uses Crab-Llvm to supply invariants to the back-end solvers.

# Licensing #

Crab is currently under a licensing process. Meanwhile, Crab cannot be
publicly distributed.

Ikos is distributed under NASA Open Source Agreement (NOSA)
Version 1.3 or later. See [Ikos_LICENSE.pdf](Ikos_LICENSE.pdf) for
details.

# Publications #

- "An Abstract Domain of Uninterpreted Functions" [(PDF)](http://www.clip.dia.fi.upm.es/~jorge/docs/terms-vmcai16.pdf). VMCAI'16.

- "Exploiting Sparsity in Difference-Bounds Matrices" [(PDF)](http://www.clip.dia.fi.upm.es/~jorge/docs/zones-SAS16.pdf). SAS'16.

Commit message:

Support for writing invariants into json or xml format

README.md, after:

# Crab: A Language-Agnostic Engine for Static Analysis #

<img src="http://i.imgur.com/IDKhq5h.png" alt="crab logo" width=280 height=200 />

# Description #

Crab allows to perform static analysis of programs based on
[Abstract Interpretation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_interpretation).

Crab does not analyze directly a mainstream programming language such as
C, C++, or Java but instead it analyzes a simplified
Control-Flow-Graph (CFG) based language which is
language-independent. This can allow Crab analyzing different
programming languages assuming a translator to the CFG-based language
is available.

Crab has been designed to have two kind of users:

1.  Analysis/verification tools that want to compute invariants using
    abstract interpretation.

2.  Researchers on abstract interpretation who would like to
    experiment with new abstract domains and fixpoint iterators.

In spite of its simple design, Crab can scale with large real programs
and its CFG-based language is rich enough to represent programs with
loops, functions, pointers, etc.

The foundations of Crab is based on a collection of abstract domains
and fixpoint iterators built on the top of
[Ikos](http://ti.arc.nasa.gov/opensource/ikos/) (Inference Kernel for
Open Static Analyzers) developed by NASA Ames Research Center.

# Crab architecture #

![Crab Architecture](https://github.com/caballa/crab/blob/crab_language/Crab_arch.jpg?raw=true "Crab Architecture")

# Installation and Usage #

Crab is written in C++ and uses heavily the Boost library. The main
requirements are:

- C++ compiler supporting c++11
- Boost and GMP

To include Crab in your application you just need to include the
corresponding C++ header files located at the `include` directory and
make sure that you link your application with the Crab libraries
(`lib` directory). This repository contains a `CMakeLists.txt` that
you can adapt for your own needs.

The `tests` directory contains many examples of how to build CFGs and
compute invariants using different abstract domains. To install all
the tests via `CMake` type:

	mkdir build && cd build
    cmake -DENABLE_TESTS=ON -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=run ../
    cmake --build . --target install 

and, for instance, to execute the test `tests/simple/test1.cc` type:

    cd run/tests/domains && ./test1

The Boxes and Apron domains require third-party libraries. To avoid
the burden to users who are not interested in those domains, the
installation of the libraries is optional.

If you want to use the BOXES domain then add `-DUSE_LDD=ON` option.

If you want to use the Apron library domains then add `-DUSE_APRON=ON` option.

# Example using C++ API#

Assume we want to perform static analysis on the following C-like
program:

```c
    int i,x,y;
	i=0;
	x=1;
	y=0;
	while (i < 100) {
		x=x+y;
		y=y+1;
		i=i+1;
	}	 
``` 

This is the C++ code to build the corresponding Crab CFG and run the
analysis using the Zones domain:

```c++
    // CFG-based language
    #include <crab/cfg/cfg.hpp>
    // Variable factory	
    #include <crab/cfg/var_factory.hpp>
    // Forward analyzer	
    #include <crab/analysis/fwd_analyzer.hpp>

    // linear expressions and constraints
    #include <crab/domains/linear_constraints.hpp>
    // Zones domain
    #include <crab/domains/split_dbm.hpp>

    typedef SplitDBM<z_number, varname_t> zones_domain_t;
    typedef num_fwd_analyzer<cfg_ref_t,zones_domain_t,str_variable_factory>::type analyzer_t;

    int main (int argc, char**argv) {
       // Declare variables i,x, and y
       str_variable_factory vfac;	
       z_var i (vfac ["i"]);
       z_var x (vfac ["x"]);
       z_var y (vfac ["y"]);
       // Create an empty CFG marking "entry" and "exit" are the labels
       // for the entry and exit blocks.
       cfg_t cfg ("entry","ret");
       // Add blocks
       basic_block_t& entry = cfg.insert ("entry");
       basic_block_t& bb1   = cfg.insert ("bb1");
       basic_block_t& bb1_t = cfg.insert ("bb1_t");
       basic_block_t& bb1_f = cfg.insert ("bb1_f");
       basic_block_t& bb2   = cfg.insert ("bb2");
       basic_block_t& ret   = cfg.insert ("ret");
       // Add control flow 
       entry >> bb1; bb1 >> bb1_t; bb1 >> bb1_f;
       bb1_t >> bb2; bb2 >> bb1; bb1_f >> ret;
       // Add statements
       entry.assign(i, 0);
       entry.assign(x, 1);
       entry.assign(y, 0);
       bb1_t.assume(i <= 99);
       bb1_f.assume(i >= 100);
       bb2.add(x,x,y);
       bb2.add(y,y,1);
       bb2.add(i,i,1);

       // Build an analyzer and run the zones domain
       analyzer_t a(cfg,vfac,...);
       a.Run(zones_domain_t::top());
       cout << "Invariants using " << zones_domain_t::getDomainName() << "\n";
	
       // Scan all CFG basic blocks and print the invariants that hold
       // at their entries
       for (auto &b : cfg) {
         auto inv = a[b.label()];
         cout << get_label_str(b.label()) << "=" << inv << "\n";
       }
	   return 0;
    }
```

The Crab output of this program, showing the invariants that hold at
the entry of each basic block, should be something like this:

    Invariants using SplitDBM
	
	entry={}
	bb1={i -> [0, 100], x -> [1, +oo], y -> [0, 100], y-i<=0, y-x<=0, i-x<=0, i-y<=0}
    bb1_t={i -> [0, 100], x -> [1, +oo], y -> [0, 100], y-i<=0, y-x<=0, i-x<=0, i-y<=0}
    bb1_f={i -> [0, 100], x -> [1, +oo], y -> [0, 100], y-i<=0, y-x<=0, i-x<=0, i-y<=0}
    bb2={i -> [0, 99], x -> [1, +oo], y -> [0, 99], y-i<=0, y-x<=0, i-x<=0, i-y<=0}
	ret={i -> [100, 100], x -> [100, +oo], y -> [100, 100], y-i<=0, y-x<=0, i-x<=0, i-y<=0}

# Example reading the CFG from a file and writing invariants to a json file #

Crab can also communicate with other tools via files. This is useful
with the client tool is written in a language different from C++ and
thus, the C++ API cannot be used directly.

1. Add option `-DENABLE_CFG_FROM_FILE=ON` to cmake. That is, when cmake
   installs crab type:

        mkdir build && cd build
        cmake -DENABLE_CFG_FROM_FILE=ON -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=run ../
        cmake --build . --target install 

2. Add manually  into `PYTHONPATH` the path to the directory `tools` (temporary hack).

Steps 1 and 2 should be performned only once. Then, type

    crab cfg.txt -o invars.json

where file `cfg.txt` must be defined using the following grammar:

    P := DOMAIN_DECL VARS_DECLS BLOCKS EDGES
	
	DOMAIN_DECL := 'abs_domain' ':' DOMAINS ';'
	DOMAINS := 'intervals | 'zones' | 'octagons' | 'polyhedra'

    VARS_DECLS := 'decl' ':' '[' VAR_DECL*  '];'
	VAR_DECL := ID ':' TYPE ';'
	TYPE = int
	
	BLOCKS := 'blocks' '{' BLOCK* '}'
	BLOCK :=  ID '[' STATEMENT* ']'
	STATEMENT := ARITH | ASSIGN | ASSERT | ASSUME | HAVOC
	A_OP := '+' | '-' | '*' | '/'
	ARITH := ID ':=' ID  A_OP ID ';' | ID ':=' ID  A_OP NUM ';' 
	ASSIGN := ID ':=' ID ';' | ID ':=' NUM ';'
	HAVOC := 'havoc' '(' ID ')' ';'
	ASSERT := 'assert' '(' LIN_CONSTRAINT ')' ';'
	ASSUME := 'assume' '(' LIN_CONSTRAINT ')' ';'
	B_OP := '>' | '<' | '=' | '!=' | '>=' | '<='
    LIN_CONSTRAINT := LIN_EXPRESION B_OP NUM
	LIN_EXPRESSION := '(' NUM '*' ID ')' | NUM | LIN_EXPRESSION '+' LIN_EXPRESSION	

	EDGES := 'edges' '{' EDGE* '}'
	EDGE := ID '->' ID ';'	


Expressions like `EDGE*` represents zero or more repetitions of
`EDGE`. Note that only linear integer expressions without functions
are supported. This is just a subset of the language supported through
the C++ API.

For example, given the following file:

    abs_domain : zones;
    decl : [x:int; y:int;];
    blocks {
      bb1[x:=0; y:=0;]
      bb2[]
      bb3[assume((1*x)<10); x := x + 1; y := y + 1;]
      bb4[assume((1*x)>=10);]
    }
    edges {bb1 ->bb2; bb2 -> bb3; bb3-> bb2; bb2->bb4;}

The content of `invars.json` is:

    ADD json file here

Each invariant holds at the entry of each basic block.

# Integrating Crab in other verification tools #

Check these projects:

- [Crab-Llvm](https://github.com/seahorn/crab-llvm) is a static
analyzer that infers invariants from LLVM-based languages using Crab.

- [SeaHorn](https://github.com/seahorn) is a verification framework
that uses Crab-Llvm to supply invariants to the back-end solvers.

# Licensing #

Crab is currently under a licensing process. Meanwhile, Crab cannot be
publicly distributed.

Ikos is distributed under NASA Open Source Agreement (NOSA)
Version 1.3 or later. See [Ikos_LICENSE.pdf](Ikos_LICENSE.pdf) for
details.

# Publications #

- "An Abstract Domain of Uninterpreted Functions" [(PDF)](http://www.clip.dia.fi.upm.es/~jorge/docs/terms-vmcai16.pdf). VMCAI'16.

- "Exploiting Sparsity in Difference-Bounds Matrices" [(PDF)](http://www.clip.dia.fi.upm.es/~jorge/docs/zones-SAS16.pdf). SAS'16.
